Migrating to permissionless fault proofs on OP Stack (#1539)
ethereum-optimism/docs: pages/operators/chain-operators/tutorials/migrating-permissionless.mdx

---
title: Migrating to permissionless fault proofs on OP Stack
description: A high-level guide for transitioning from permissioned to permissionless fault proofs on an OP Stack.
lang: en-US
content_type: tutorial
topic: migrating to permissionless fault proofs on OP Stack
personas:
  - chain-operator
categories:
  - testnet
  - local-devnet
  - chain-deployment
  - docker
  - chain-configuration
  - chain-operation
  - node-management
is_imported_content: 'false'
---

# Migrating to permissionless fault proofs on OP Stack

This guide provides a high-level overview for chain operators looking to transition their OP Stack from permissioned to permissionless fault proofs. It's designed to be accessible for technical decision makers while providing sufficient detail for implementation teams.

## Overview

> The OP Stack architecture uses fault proofs to ensure the validity of transactions processed on Layer 2. Transitioning from permissioned to permissionless proofs represents a significant security upgrade, allowing any participant to challenge invalid state transitions rather than relying on a limited set of trusted validators.

Reviewer: It is allows any particiapnt to propose and challenge state output roots. For our permissioned games, it's only one "trusted validator", the proposer role configured on the PermissionedDisputeGame. Which is in almost all cases the single sequencer

This migration involves several key components:

*   Configuring security-critical dispute [monitoring services](/operators/chain-operators/tools/chain-monitoring)

> *   Deploying and configuring smart contracts using [OPCM](/stack/opcm)

Reviewer: reference op-deployer instead, we want to move up one level of abstraction so people don't have to worry about OPCM running under the hood of op-deployer

*   Testing the new system before activation

> *   Switching the chain to use the new permissionless system

Reviewer: We refer to this as setting the respected game type to permissionless fault proofs, which is the FaultDisputeGame

## Prerequisites

Before beginning this transition, your chain should:

*   Be running a standard OP Stack implementation
*   Be operating with the recommended infrastructure services including [`op-challenger`](/stack/fault-proofs/challenger) and [`op-dispute-mon`](/operators/chain-operators/tools/chain-monitoring#dispute-mon)

> ## 1. Configure the dispute monitoring stack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. Configure the dispute components
```

> The `op-challenger` and `op-dispute-mon` services are critical security components that participate in the dispute game process to challenge invalid proposals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `op-challenger` and `op-dispute-mon` services are critical security components that participate in the dispute game process to challenge invalid proposals and monitor active games.
```

### Upgrade to the latest `op-challenger`

> Upgrade to `version 1.3.3` or [later](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/releases), which contains important improvements to simplify the upgrade process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upgrade to the [latest release](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/releases), which contains important improvements to simplify the upgrade process.
```

```bash
# Example upgrade command (implementation may vary based on your deployment)
git clone https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism -b op-challenger/v1.3.3 --recurse-submodules
cd optimism
make op-challenger

> ```

Reviewer: it's better if they use docker so I recommend the step of building it from source

### Update network configuration

> Configure `op-challenger` to load your chain configuration. Even if your chain is not included in the superchain-registry, you can specify a custom configuration:

Reviewer: internal link to superchain-registry here please

```bash
# For chains in the registry
--network <chain-name>

> # For chains not in the registry, provide a path to your configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# For chains not in the registry, provide a path to your rollup configuration
```

> --network-config /path/to/your/network-config.json

Reviewer: Is this the right flag? If yes, can you update this section too? https://docs.optimism.io/operators/chain-operators/tools/op-challenger#--network

please include the genesis file too

```

### Enable cannon trace type

Configure `op-challenger` to support both permissioned and permissionless games by setting:

```bash

> --trace-type permissioned,cannon

Reviewer: Can you update this: https://docs.optimism.io/operators/chain-operators/tools/op-challenger#execute-challenger

to be both permissioned and cannon?

```

Or by setting the environment variable:

```
OP_CHALLENGER_TRACE_TYPE=permissioned,cannon
```

### Configure prestates access

> Replace the `--cannon-prestate` flag with `--prestates-url`, which points to a source containing all required prestates:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace the `--cannon-prestate` flag with `--prestates-url`, which points to a source containing all required preimage:
```

the absolute prestate is just the hash, the preimage is what runs. I'll let proofs confirm this one tho

```bash
--prestates-url <URL_TO_PRESTATES_DIRECTORY>
```

> The URL can use `http`, `https`, or `file` protocols. Each prestate should be named as `<PRESTATE_HASH>.json` or `<PRESTATE_HASH>.bin.gz`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The URL can use `http`, `https`, or `file` protocols. Each preimage should be named as `<PRESTATE_HASH>.json` or `<PRESTATE_HASH>.bin.gz`.
```

### Building required prestates for chains not in the Superchain Registry

You'll need at least two prestates:

1.  The prestate used for permissioned games

> 2.  The prestate matching the `faultGameAbsolutePrestate` configuration

Reviewer: You should be able to use the same absolute prestate

For chains not in the Superchain Registry, you need to build custom prestates with your chain's configuration:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism --recurse-submodules
cd optimism

# To build a specific prestate (e.g., for op-program/v1.3.1)

> git checkout op-program/v1.3.1

Reviewer: lets reference the latest releast v1.3.3

make reproducible-prestate

# Generate the prestate with your chain's specific configuration
./op-program/bin/op-program \
  --l2.genesis /path/to/your/l2-genesis.json \
  --rollup.config /path/to/your/rollup-config.json \
  --network.l2chainid <YOUR_L2_CHAIN_ID> \
  --exec.prestate
```

The prestate will be generated at `op-program/bin/prestate.json` (or `prestate.bin.gz` for newer versions).

### Ensure sufficient funds for bonds

Unlike with permissioned games, the challenger will need to post bonds with each claim it makes. 

As a general guideline:
*   Maintain a minimum balance of 50 ETH
*   Have access to a large pool of ETH for potential attack scenarios
*   Implement monitoring to ensure sufficient funds are always available

### Set up `op-dispute-mon`

> Ensure `op-dispute-mon` is properly configured by following these [steps](/operators/chain-operators/tools/chain-monitoring#dispute-mon)

Reviewer 2: The link is broken, should it be this? https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/docs/blob/main/pages/operators/chain-operators/tools/chain-monitoring.mdx#dispute-mon

Reviewer 2: Ah nevermind that's exactly the same, it was broken in the page view mode. Ignore this.

## 2. Deploy and configure smart contracts using OPCM

This section requires privileged actions by the `ProxyAdminOwner` and may involve the `Guardian` role depending on your security setup.

### Using OPCM for deployment

OPCM is the recommended tool for safely managing OP Stack upgrades:

```bash
# Install OPCM

> git clone https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/op-chain-manager.git

Reviewer 3: I don't think this exists?

Reviewer: It does not, what is the preferred method for deploying dispute game contracts in the post-OPCM world?

Reviewer 3: It should be done via a call to `opcm.addGameType()`.

cd op-chain-manager
npm install

# Configure OPCM with your chain's information
cp config.example.json config.json
# Edit config.json with your chain's specific addresses and parameters
```

### Set game implementations

> Using OPCM, execute the following smart contract changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execute the following smart contract changes in a single bundled transaction:
```

1.  Call `setImplementation` on the `DisputeGameFactoryProxy` to:

    *   Set the implementation for the new permissionless `FaultDisputeGame` (game type `0`)
    *   Upgrade the permissioned game to the new `PermissionedDisputeGameAddress` (game type `1`) with the updated absolute prestate

    ```bash
    # Using OPCM to manage the upgrades
    npx opcm upgrade dispute-game-factory \
      --permissionless-impl <NEW_PERMISSIONLESS_IMPL_ADDR> \
      --permissioned-impl <NEW_PERMISSIONED_IMPL_ADDR> \
      --absolute-prestate <PRESTATE_HASH>

>     ```

Reviewer: I'm assuming this is place holder code, we'll need someone on the EVM Safety team let us know what the superchain-ops 2.0 template uses.

2.  Upgrade the `AnchorStateRegistryProxy`:

    *   First upgrade to point to the `StorageSetter` contract and clear the initialized flag
    *   Then upgrade back to the `AnchorStateRegistry` implementation
    *   Call `initialize` with the anchor state for the new game type

> 

Reviewer 4: This shouldn't be required after upgrade 13 (the FP incident response improvements) as there is only a single anchor state which is shared by all game types.  It is however important to ensure that a permissioned game has resolved with the correct root and updated the anchor state to something valid, as the initial deployment at genesis always has an invalid anchor state.

>     ```bash
>     # First upgrade to the StorageSetter to clear initialization flag
>     npx opcm upgrade anchor-registry \
>       --implementation <STORAGE_SETTER_ADDR> \
>       --skip-initialize
> 
>     # Then upgrade back to the proper implementation
>     npx opcm upgrade anchor-registry \
>       --implementation <ANCHOR_REGISTRY_IMPL_ADDR>
> 
>     # Initialize with the correct anchor state
>     npx opcm initialize anchor-registry \
>       --game-type 0 \
>       --anchor-state <ANCHOR_STATE_FOR_GAME_TYPE_0>
>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 3.  Initialize bond amounts for each game type to exactly 0.08 ETH:
>     ```bash
>     # Set bond amounts for both game types
>     npx opcm set-bond-amount \
>       --game-type 0 \
>       --bond-amount 0.08ether
> 
>     npx opcm set-bond-amount \
>       --game-type 1 \
>       --bond-amount 0.08ether
>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  Initialize bond amounts for each game type to 0.08 ETH.
```

> The anchor state for permissionless games should match the current anchor state for permissioned games at the time of migration.

Reviewer: We need proofs to weigh in here, I don't know if this is technically correct

Reviewer 4: It is right but redundant once you've applied upgrade 13 as there's only one anchor state shared by all game types.

> ### Understanding ProxyAdmin Owner and Guardian roles

Reviewer: This section should be pushed up under the h2

This migration requires actions by privileged roles in your system:

> *   The **ProxyAdmin Owner** has the authority to upgrade contracts and is typically controlled by a secure multisig. This role will execute most of the contract upgrades described in this guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   The **ProxyAdmin Owner** has the authority to upgrade proxy contracts.
```

> *   The **Guardian** has emergency powers like pausing withdrawals but more limited capabilities than the ProxyAdmin Owner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   The **Guardian** has emergency powers like pausing withdrawals and changing the respected game type.
```

For detailed information about privileged roles and their security implications, refer to the [privileged roles documentation](/superchain/privileged-roles).

## 3. Testing off-chain agents

> Before enabling permissionless proofs for withdrawals, thoroughly test your off-chain monitoring services.

Reviewer: After you've set the permissionless FaultDisputeContract implementations on the DisputeGameFactory and before you set the respected game type to it; you can test your off-chain services in the cold path.

### Test defending valid proposals

Create a valid proposal using the permissionless game type `0`:

1.  Ensure the proposal is from a block at or before the `safe` head:
    ```bash
    cast block --rpc-url <OP_GETH_ENDPOINT> safe
    ```

2.  Get a valid output root:
    ```bash
    cast rpc --rpc-url <OP_NODE_ENDPOINT> optimism_outputAtBlock \
      $(cast 2h <BLOCK_NUMBER>) | jq -r .outputRoot
    ```

3.  Create a test game:
    ```bash
    ./op-challenger/bin/op-challenger create-game \
      --l1-eth-rpc=<L1_RPC_ENDPOINT> \
      --game-factory-address <DISPUTE_GAME_FACTORY_ADDR> \
      --l2-block-num <BLOCK_NUMBER> \
      --output-root <OUTPUT_ROOT> \
      <SIGNER_OPTIONS>
    ```

4.  Verify:
    *   `op-challenger` logs a message showing the game is in progress
    *   `op-challenger` doesn't post a counter claim (as this is a valid proposal)
    *   `dispute-mon` includes the new game with `status="agree_defender_ahead"`

> ### Test countering invalid claims

Reviewer: I'll let the proofs team take a closer look at this section

Reviewer 4: Looks right to me. Note that you can test this out on op-sepolia anytime and it should work as expected.

Post an invalid counter claim to the valid proposal created above:

```bash
./op-challenger/bin/op-challenger move \
  --l1-eth-rpc <L1_RPC_ENDPOINT> \
  --game-address <GAME_ADDR> \
  --attack \
  --parent-index 0 \

>   --claim 0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  --claim 0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000501B01 \
```

Reviewer: hehe

  --l1-eth-rpc <L1_RPC_ENDPOINT> \
  --game-address <GAME_ADDR>
```

There should be 3 claims in the game after this test.

## 4. Switch to permissionless proofs

After completing all previous steps and verifying their successful operation:

1.  Set the `respectedGameType` on the `OptimismPortal` to `CANNON` (game type `0`) using OPCM:
    ```bash
    npx opcm set-respected-game-type \
      --game-type 0
    ```

2.  Configure `op-proposer` to create proposals using the permissionless `cannon` game type:

    ```bash
    # Change from game-type 1 to 0
    --game-type 0
    ```

    Or via environment variable:

    ```
    OP_PROPOSER_GAME_TYPE=0
    ```

## Next steps

*   [Optimism Fault Proof Documentation](/operators/chain-operators/tools/op-challenger)
*   [Privileged Roles Documentation](/superchain/privileged-roles)
*   [L2Beat OP Mainnet Upgrades](https://l2beat.com/scaling/projects/op-mainnet#upgrades-and-governance)
*   [op-challenger GitHub](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/tree/develop/op-challenger)
*   [op-dispute-mon GitHub](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/tree/develop/op-dispute-mon)

## Conclusion

> Transitioning to permissionless proofs represents a significant security improvement for your OP Stack chain. This transition decentralizes the validation process, allowing any participant to challenge invalid state transitions rather than relying on a limited set of trusted validators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transitioning to permissionless proofs represents a significant security improvement for your OP Stack chain. This transition decentralizes the validation process, allowing any participant to challenge invalid withdrawal claims rather than relying on a limited set of trusted validators.
```

> By following this guide, you'll be able to safely configure and test your system before making the final switch to permissionless proofs. Remember to thoroughly test each service before proceeding to the next step, and ensure that your security monitoring is properly configured to track the health of the system after the transition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By following this guide, you'll be able to safely configure and test your system before making the switch to permissionless proofs. Remember to thoroughly test each service before proceeding to the next step, and ensure that your security monitoring is properly configured to track the health of the system after the transition.
```

technically they can fall back to permissioned games by the guardian calling the set respected game type

## Prerequisites

Before beginning this transition, your chain should:

*   Be running a standard OP Stack implementation
*   Be operating with the recommended infrastructure services including [`op-challenger`](/stack/fault-proofs/challenger) and [`op-dispute-mon`](/operators/chain-operators/tools/chain-monitoring#dispute-mon)

## 1. Configure the dispute components

The `op-challenger` and `op-dispute-mon` services are critical security components that participate in the dispute game process to challenge invalid proposals and monitor active games.

### Upgrade to the latest `op-challenger`

Upgrade to the [latest release](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/releases), which contains important improvements to simplify the upgrade process.

We recommend using the official Docker images for reliability and ease of deployment:

```bash
docker pull us-docker.pkg.dev/oplabs-tools-artifacts/images/op-challenger:v1.3.3
```
Then run the image, for example:

```bash
docker run -d --name op-challenger \
  -e OP_CHALLENGER_TRACE_TYPE=permissioned,cannon \
  -e OP_CHALLENGER_PRESTATES_URL=<YOUR_PRESTATES_URL> \
  us-docker.pkg.dev/oplabs-tools-artifacts/images/op-challenger:v1.3.3

>   ```

Author: @sbvegan I got this docker image [here](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/releases/tag/op-challenger%2Fv1.3.3), in a case where the `op-challenger` has a new version in a few weeks, this section of the docs will become outdated, how do we treat this?

Author: Nvm.
I've updated the Docker command to use the latest tag instead of a specific version number:
`docker pull us-docker.pkg.dev/oplabs-tools-artifacts/images/op-challenger:latest`
This way, the documentation will stay relevant as new versions are released, and devs will automatically pull the most recent stable version. 
Would you recommend adding any additional notes about version compatibility or checking for specific versions if needed?

### Set up `op-dispute-mon`

Ensure `op-dispute-mon` is properly configured by following these [steps](/operators/chain-operators/tools/chain-monitoring#dispute-mon)

## 2. Deploy and configure smart contracts using OPCM

This section requires privileged actions by the `ProxyAdminOwner` and may involve the `Guardian` role depending on your security setup.

### Understanding ProxyAdmin Owner and Guardian roles

This migration requires actions by privileged roles in your system:

*   The **ProxyAdmin Owner** has the authority to upgrade proxy contracts.

*   The **Guardian** has emergency powers like pausing withdrawals and changing the respected game type.

For detailed information about privileged roles and their security implications, refer to the [privileged roles documentation](/superchain/privileged-roles).

### Adding the PermissionlessDisputeGame to a chain

Given that not all chains will support the `PermissionlessDisputeGame` upon deployment, an
`OPCM.addGameType()` method will be added which will orchestrate the actions required to add a
new game type.

This method will:

1.  deploy the `FaultDisputeGame` contract
2.  setup the `DelayedWethProxy` for the new game

> 3.  Reinitialize the `AnchorStateRegistry` to add the new game type.

Author: @maurelian Are these the accurate steps?

Reviewer: Interesting! If this is the new way to deploy the permissionless game, we should also include the parameters and an example command on how to deploy it. Because we need to specify the absolute prestate.

    *   Set the implementation for the new permissionless `FaultDisputeGame` (game type `0`)
    *   Upgrade the permissioned game to the new `PermissionedDisputeGameAddress` (game type `1`) with the updated absolute prestate

2.  Upgrade the `AnchorStateRegistryProxy` (pre-Upgrade 13 only):

    After [upgrade 13](/notices/upgrade-13#whats-included-in-upgrade-13) (FP incident response improvements), this step is *no longer required*, as a single anchor state is shared across all game types. If you have not upgraded, perform the following:

    *   First upgrade the proxy to point to the `StorageSetter` contract and clear the initialized flag.
    *   Then upgrade back to the `AnchorStateRegistry` implementation
    *   Call `initialize` with the anchor state for the new game type

<Callout type="info">
  Ensure a permissioned game has already resolved with the correct root and updated the anchor state to a valid value.
  Initial deployments at genesis always have an invalid anchor state.
</Callout>

Post-upgrade 13, the anchor state for permissionless games automatically matches the current anchor state used by permissioned games, since there's only one shared anchor state.

> 3.  Initialize bond amounts for each game type to exactly 0.08 ETH

Author: @ajsutton @sbvegan How do we feel about this section?

Reviewer: I'm not sure of the details around U13 to comment on this, but the rest seems like good high level guidance. I think ideally we'll want more superchain-ops style guidance on how to prepare this. Andrea should have context on how to do this, he just prepared Ink Sepolia's permissionless upgrade task.

  As a result, the original permissioned prestate usually isn't suitable for permissionless operation.
  Therefore, it's common practice to generate and maintain two separate prestates.
  The challenger will need access to both in order to properly monitor existing permissioned games and newly activated permissionless games.
</Callout>

For chains not in the Superchain Registry, you need to build custom prestates with your chain's configuration:

```bash
# 1. Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism --recurse-submodules
cd optimism

# 2. Create a branch from the latest op-program release
git checkout -b op-program/chainconfig op-program/v1.5.0

# 3. Add your chain configuration to the op-program chainconfig directory
# Your rollup config must be named <chain-id>-rollup.json
# Your L2 genesis must be named <chain-id>-genesis-l2.json
mkdir -p op-program/chainconfig/configs 
cp /path/to/your/rollup-config.json op-program/chainconfig/configs/<YOUR_L2_CHAIN_ID>-rollup.json
cp /path/to/your/l2-genesis.json op-program/chainconfig/configs/<YOUR_L2_CHAIN_ID>-genesis-l2.json

> # 4. Commit your changes
> git add op-program/chainconfig/configs/
> git commit -m "Add chain configuration for <YOUR_CHAIN_NAME>"
> 
> # 5. Build the reproducible prestate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# 4. Build the reproducible prestate
```

I think we can omit this step because we don't tell them to push or make a branch or anything like that

1.  deploy the `FaultDisputeGame` contract
2.  setup the `DelayedWethProxy` for the new game
3.  Reinitialize the `AnchorStateRegistry` to add the new game type.

See a high‐level implementation from the [spec](https://specs.optimism.io/experimental/op-contracts-manager.html#implementation-2)

### Set game implementations

Execute the following smart contract changes in a single bundled transaction:

1.  Call `setImplementation` on the `DisputeGameFactoryProxy` to:

    *   Set the implementation for the new permissionless `FaultDisputeGame` (game type `0`)
    *   Upgrade the permissioned game to the new `PermissionedDisputeGameAddress` (game type `1`) with the updated absolute prestate

2.  Upgrade the `AnchorStateRegistryProxy` (pre-Upgrade 13 only):

    After [upgrade 13](/notices/upgrade-13#whats-included-in-upgrade-13) (FP incident response improvements), this step is *no longer required*, as a single anchor state is shared across all game types. If you have not upgraded, perform the following:

    *   First upgrade the proxy to point to the `StorageSetter` contract and clear the initialized flag.
    *   Then upgrade back to the `AnchorStateRegistry` implementation

>     *   Call `initialize` with the anchor state for the new game type

Reviewer 3: I propose that we: 
1. Declare that this document is only for chains which are on `op-contracts/v2.0.0` (upgrade 13). 
2. Then we can just remove steps 2 and 3 from this list. Otherwise we need to support two very different approaches.

      <SIGNER_OPTIONS>
    ```

4.  Verify:
    *   `op-challenger` logs a message showing the game is in progress
    *   `op-challenger` doesn't post a counter claim (as this is a valid proposal)
    *   `dispute-mon` includes the new game with `status="agree_defender_ahead"`

### Test countering invalid claims

Post an invalid counter claim to the valid proposal created above:

```bash
./op-challenger/bin/op-challenger move \
  --l1-eth-rpc <L1_RPC_ENDPOINT> \
  --game-address <GAME_ADDR> \
  --attack \
  --parent-index 0 \
  --claim 0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 \
  <SIGNER_OPTIONS>
```

Verify that `op-challenger` posts a counter-claim to the invalid claim. You can view claims using:

```bash
./op-challenger/bin/op-challenger list-claims \
  --l1-eth-rpc <L1_RPC_ENDPOINT> \
  --game-address <GAME_ADDR>
```

There should be 3 claims in the game after this test.

## 4. Switch to permissionless proofs

After completing all previous steps and verifying their successful operation:

1.  Set the `respectedGameType` on the `OptimismPortal` to `CANNON` (game type `0`) using OPCM:
    ```bash
    opcm set-respected-game-type \
      --game-type 0

>     ```

Reviewer: I do not think this is correct, you can ask Andrea how to do this. You can likely craft the calldata using forge. It's probably best to do that, put it in an input.json bundle format, so it can be simulated with tenderly.
